[WHOOSH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> When I was very young,
I didn't really believe any
of the theories about
how the world worked,
whether I learned it from school
in science or my religious
teachings, my
Methodist religion.
I didn't believe, really.
None of it really satisfied me.
And so I started
exploring other types
of spiritual kinds of text.
So things like Kabbalah or
theosophy or anthroposophy.
Those kinds of things
really interested me.
I also read "The Dead Sea
Scrolls," books of the Bible
that they claim weren't
put into the Bible,
because I wanted to
know what was really
going on with our world.
What was our purpose?
Why are we here?
And I couldn't
find these answers.
And eventually, I realized
from all of the reading
that I did that the
best way to find out
is through personal experience.
And meditation was
something I had learned
about that you could
get quiet inside
and learn how to access things
like maybe your intuition
or telepathic abilities.
And so I wanted to learn
how all of this worked.
When I first tried to meditate,
it was really impossible.
I would simply watch more
breath and close my eyes
and wait for my mind to empty,
and it wasn't so simple.
I would try to meditate and all
I would hear is grocery lists
or what conversation I wanted
to have with my boss next week.
This was not quieting the mind
at all, until I found sound.
And certain types
of sound really
helped me find that
quiet space inside.
So at first it was things
like gongs or tuning forks
or brass bowls, crystal bowls.
[HUM]
And this kind of sound really
helped me to quiet the brain.
Now in modern times,
we have something
called binaural
beats, and these are
sounds created with
digital frequencies that
create that wah, wah sound,
but in very deliberate ways.
And what those sounds
are designed to do,
binaural beats are
at their most basic
putting one frequency in one
ear and a slightly different
frequency in the other ear.
And it's the difference
between those two frequencies
that's important.
And that difference
is driving what
we believe is a brainwave
state associated
with states of meditation.
When you take an EEG device that
measures the electric signal
that comes out of the
brain, it comes out
in hertz or cycles per second.
And zero to four hertz
is delta, and that's
the state that's associated
with sleep or coma.
Four to seven hertz is
theta, and that's associated
with deep meditative states.
Seven to about 12
hertz is alpha,
and that's associated with
being relaxed or very focused.
12 to, say, 30 hertz,
that's the beta state.
That's the state we're in
when we're walking, talking.
And that's the state we want
to kind of remove ourselves
from and get into that lower
state of awareness associated
with meditation.
Between delta and
theta, that's the state
between asleep and awake.
And others call this
the hypnagogic state.
When you can get the body
very profoundly relaxed,
but the mind is
still aware, that's
the state we're very
interested in, because this
is where we can start to
make real change in ourselves
and also start to
notice things that
are beyond the physical body.
And so one of those
things is the observer.
We call it the inner observer.
That's the part of you
that's behind the thoughts.
And so one of the most common
meditative sort of directions
is to watch your breath.
And when you notice
your mind wandering,
return your attention
to the breath.
And it's the part of you
that notices your mind
is wandering that we're
most interested in.
This is not your thoughts.
This is not your
reactive emotions.
That's what we're used to
thinking of as who we are.
But when we can get behind
all that-- and binaural beats
can help us do
that, because they
help to reduce our awareness
of those ongoing thoughts
and get us into an
awareness that's more
associated with maybe dreaming.
But we're very aware.
These kinds of sounds can be
used for all kinds of reasons.
Some people use them just to
get a better night's sleep,
because we can feed those
signals that will put you
into a more restful state.
But other people use
them to gain more focus
when they're studying.
People use them to get more
creative, to access creativity
that is from within.
So painters or writers can
use it to kind of open up
those channels.
And not only that, you
can use these recordings
to relieve stress and anxiety.
And I think this really
speaks to this correlation
between our inner world
and our outer world.
And so when we get
ourselves kind of in order
in our inner world, that's
when things in our outer world
really start to change.
And this can be kind
of counterintuitive,
but the way this works is when
we can think of things that we
want to have in our lives--
let's say it's a
more fulfilling job,
more fulfilling employment.
How do we get there?
Well, many people
use affirmations
where they speak the things
that they want in their minds.
But a more powerful
way to do this
is to bring your
feelings into it.
And so the idea
that we recommend
when people want to bring
something new into their lives
is to imagine, what would
it feel like if you already
had that fulfilling,
satisfying job?
We can all imagine what it would
feel like to have something
that we wish to have.
And so this is what needs to
be added to just our thoughts.
And very often, when you
start to go within and start
to pay attention to that
inner world, at least
in my case and many
that I've spoken to,
we start to find little things
that don't seem to belong,
things that we maybe
thought we had dealt with.
So things like deep
loneliness or despair
might come up when you
start to get quiet inside.
And I know I thought
to myself, well,
when I felt this
kind of despair,
I thought, well, I'm not lonely.
I have friends.
What's going on here?
And what I eventually
discovered is
that I was triggering an
emotional trauma that I
had maybe 20 years
ago in my childhood
that I hadn't really
dealt with, and I had just
stored into my system.
And so when we start
to imagine things
that we want to
have in our lives,
if there's conflicting
feelings inside,
that can really put a
damper on everything.
And so it's really
important to understand
all of your emotional reactions,
all of the kinds of limiting
beliefs you might
have about things
that you want to generate
happening in your life.
By going within, by establishing
this practice of triggering
emotional traumas
and releasing them
and understanding where beliefs
might be getting in your way,
these are the
subconscious beliefs
that maybe we're
not quite aware of.
We want to clear out
all those conflicts
and find real clarity inside.
And when you can
really release all
of the limiting beliefs
and emotional reactions,
that's when you
really start to align
with that more expanded
nature of who we
all truly are made of.
We are souls at our most
basic, and we are in a body.
It's not the opposite.
We weren't a body
that created a soul.
We were a soul that
inhabits a body.
And so really understanding
how your soul works,
why it came here, you know,
what it needs to accomplish
can be very useful.
And any practice of going
within can get you there.
But for me, binaural
beats have always
been a very useful way of
getting past that surface
kind of thoughts and emotions.
One of the more useful
techniques that I learned
was awareness of the heart.
And I was very, very fascinated
by all of the research done
by HeartMath.
This is an institute
in California
that's been scientifically
studying the heart for decades.
And what they've found--
and this is for all of us,
all of us who have a heart--
that it emits an
electromagnetic field
that comes out of
the body like this,
and it's in the
shape of a torus.
What they found is it
actually expands and contracts
based on your emotional state.
So emotions like joy
or happiness, that'll
create a very large field.
But emotions like
sadness or grief
or anger or greed,
emotions like that
will create a more
constricted field.
And this is important, because
our electromagnetic field
of the heart actually
expands and contracts.
And as it does that,
it has the ability
to influence other
people around us.
Now, our brains have an
electromagnetic field too.
And people like to
think that the brain is
in charge of everything.
And of course, it's a
very important organ
in the body, no doubt.
But the brain has a much
smaller electromagnetic field.
The heart is 60 times
greater than the brain's
in the electric
part of the field.
And in the emotional
part of the field,
the heart is 3,000 times
bigger than the brain.
So you can imagine as it's
expanding and contracting
that it's reaching some
rather far distances.
And this ability to influence
others is quite remarkable.
They've done
studies at HeartMath
where someone will be sitting
across the table from someone
else, and the one person
who's in on the experiment
is doing what's known as
a coherence technique.
Now, a coherence
technique is simply
generating a feeling
of gratitude.
Not a thought of gratitude,
but a feeling of gratitude.
And the person who's
doing this is actually
able to influence the
heart rate variability
and the brainwave state of
the person sitting across
from them, bringing them
into a calmer state.
And so as we're walking
around in the world
and interacting
with others, this
is going on, whether
we realize it or not.
Our hearts are influencing
the people around us.
And we can pay
attention, and we know
who those people are who maybe
make us feel uncomfortable
and those others who make us
feel very good and welcome.
And this is really
interesting to note.
But along with noting what
is going on in other people's
heart fields, it's most
useful to pay attention
to what's going on in
your own heart field.
Your own heart field
is the only one
that you have the ability
to manage directly,
and you do it by learning to
manage your emotional state.
And so this idea of generating
feelings of gratitude,
for me this was
very difficult. I
knew how to think of
things I was grateful for,
but generating a
feeling was different.
I seem to be one
of those people--
and there may be many
of us out there--
who learned how to shut down
my feelings in order to protect
myself from being hurt.
But at the same time,
I lost the ability
to generate at will these
really good types of feelings.
And so I had to
practice for a while.
And one of the pieces
of advice I got
was to recall things from my
past that I was grateful for.
I remembered back to
when I was six years old.
My mother had taken
in a stray dog,
and that dog was a girl
dog, and it was pregnant.
And it proceeded to give birth
to puppies underneath my bed.
And this was a very
magical kind of moment
for me, all of this
wiggly life coming
to fore underneath my bed.
And so this memory
of this experience
caused me to feel these kind
of flickers of gratitude
in my heart.
And the more I
practiced this feeling,
the more I felt it grow.
It's this sort of
warm kind of energy
that you feel in your heart.
And when you really
focus on it, you
can feel it expand
around your body.
And all of us can do this.
Say, in a line at a
bank or a grocery store
where maybe some people
are in a bad mood
because it's taking
too long, when
I imagine my heart
expanding around
my body with these
good feelings,
I can see people's mood change.
And so this can be very useful
to just try in your own life.
It's fascinating to read
about this kind of research,
but applying it in
our lives is what
I find to be the most useful way
to kind of use this information
to help myself and also others.
And I call this the
ultimate golden rule.
You know, how we
want to treat others
as we would like to be treated.
Well, the ultimate
golden rule is
placing this kind of
self-love, these loving
feelings in your heart, knowing
that it's affecting people
around you in positive ways.
And so if all, all
humans on the planet
or even the majority of us
can learn how to do this,
imagine how our
world might change.
This idea of feeling gratitude
is really a beautiful way
to think about this
idea of loving yourself.
I know when I grappled
with that concept,
it was very challenging for me
to think about directing love
towards myself, because
many of us, when we're
very young usually, we
try to protect ourselves
from things that happen.
In my case, my parents,
my mother and father,
were divorced at
a very young age.
And they involved
me and my brothers
very directly in this
decision by sitting us down
when I was seven years old and
asking us, which parent would
you like to live with?
They asked us to
make that choice.
Now at this time, my father had
been in Vietnam for two years,
and I didn't really
know him that well,
because he hadn't been around.
So for me, it was a
very easy decision.
I said, well, of course I
want to live with my mother.
And I decided in that moment
that I didn't need my father.
Now at that moment, it
felt like the very thing
I needed to do to
keep myself to be
strong to not miss him and feel
so sad that he wasn't around.
But what I effectively
ended up doing
was shutting down my
ability to receive love
from men, basically.
And so this worked fine when I
was a child, but as I got older
and I wanted to get into
relationships with others,
I had built this
wall around my heart,
a wall I didn't even
realize existed.
And it's when I started
meditating, especially
when I started doing Sufi
heart rhythm meditation where
we started to put a lot
of awareness on the heart,
and we did this by
imagining our breath was
moving in and out of our heart.
Just that simple
act alone triggered
these feelings of
abandonment, of being alone,
of having no one
there, and despair,
and I didn't know
where it came from.
And then I realized
eventually-- it wasn't quick,
this can take a little time--
that I had done it to myself.
And we all do this.
When we're rejected as
children from our peers,
maybe from an abusive parent,
or maybe a teacher or minister
says something in
a certain way that
hurts us and we
don't understand--
and I call these baby wounds,
because they happen to us
before we can really
have the bigger
picture of maybe why a parent
or teacher said a certain thing.
They're wounds inside that
happened before we understood
what was going on, and
we set up little systems
to protect ourselves.
And so as adults, as
grown-ups, it is very useful
to go in and understand
maybe if you're
having issues in
relationships, or maybe you're
having an issue where you can't
hold down a steady job, what
did you potentially do
when you were very young
and didn't realize how it
might affect you later in life?
It can be called an
abandonment wound,
a universal abandonment wound.
We all seem to
create these reasons
for not being good
enough, for not
being deserving,
any of those things
that we want to
have in our lives.
And these are very often
subconscious beliefs
that hold us back, and other
times they're very conscious.
But all of them are related
to things that we probably
didn't mean to do to ourselves.
And it can be very useful
to go within, find out
what those things are in your
own life, and release them.
These kinds of
things can really set
you free to really manifest
the things that you
want to have in your life.
It's so easy, especially
in relationships
or any kind of issue, to
blame others for our problems.
It's always something
else beyond our control.
Now in psychology, there's
something called locus
of control, internal or
external locus of control.
And internal locus
of control people
believe that their actions,
their beliefs, their thoughts,
and their behaviors have an
influence on their unfolding
reality.
But external locus
of control people,
they think that everything
is fate or destiny,
that there's
nothing they can do,
that the world will deliver
to them whatever it will,
and they're just a
victim of all of this.
But in relationship,
it can be very useful
when you're triggered somehow by
something that someone else is
doing to not blame
the other person,
but to look inside yourself and
wonder, what is inside of me
that's causing that trigger?
Why am I responding to
this particular behavior
in this way?
And so by focusing on the
inner world, lots of things
can change in the outer world.
And this happened for me.
I didn't realize
really the extent
of how this could go until
I started meditating.
I did have a relationship
I wasn't satisfied with.
I did have a job I
wasn't satisfied with.
I lived in a location
that I wasn't satisfied.
And I wondered, how could I
change all of those things?
And it was very challenging
to think about making
all of those changes.
But when I started
going within and I
started to release all
of these limiting beliefs
and these old traumas,
I didn't realize that
by cleaning up my inner
world, by really developing
and cultivating that
peaceful inner sanctum,
then my outer world
started to change.
All by itself.
It was completely amazing
how all of this took place.
And I've met other people--
I'm not alone.
I tell other people
this and they
will say the same thing
happened to them, that when
they started to focus
on their inner world
that everything in
their outer world
started to shift on its own.
And this even extended to issues
with my daughter, that teenager
I was having troubles with.
I used to want to fix her.
I would want to
talk to her teachers
and straighten her friends out
and change what clothes she
was wearing, and all of that.
But when I started focusing on
my inner world and didn't worry
about her anymore--
of course, I still worried,
but I didn't actively
try to make changes
in her life--
she started to make changes
in her life on her own.
It was amazing.
And so I think we all kind of
set these templates for others
to follow.
Somehow I believe it's related
to that electromagnetic field
of the heart.
When my electromagnetic
field gets smooth
and I'm around my daughter,
hers automatically
starts to get smoother.
And so again, this
ultimate golden rule.
By focusing on ourselves
and creating that self-love,
we end up helping
others in ways that
are so mysterious, but
obvious once they take place.
And these synchronicities
are fascinating,
because sometimes these
things will happen,
and we like to call
them coincidences.
For example, if we're
looking for an answer
to a vexing problem,
and then suddenly you
see a billboard that has a
word on it that triggers,
oh my gosh, that's the
solution, many of us
call that a coincidence.
But really, a better
word is synchronicity.
Carl Jung used this word
in his therapy work.
And these are things
that happen that maybe
are related in ways that we
can't imagine from our place.
But when we start to realize
that the universe is working
for us, and when we can create
a resonance, for example,
of positivity and love
and gratitude, all of that
is sort of a beacon
that is radiating
these kinds of feelings.
And the universe has no
choice but to line up
with that resonance.
By creating that
within yourself,
you open up this
opportunity for the universe
to deliver to you what it
is that you're seeking.
But you must pay attention.
There's a joke I like to
tell where a man was drowning
in the ocean, and he prays to
God, God, will you help me?
And God doesn't answer.
And a boat goes by
and he says, hey,
would you like us to help you?
Throws him a life raft.
He says, no, no, no.
I'm waiting for God.
Someone else comes by.
Hey, here.
A helicopter with a rope.
No, no, no.
I'm waiting for God.
He ends up drowning.
He gets to heaven and
says, God, what happened?
I was calling for you.
And he says, well, what do
you think that boat was?
What do you think
that helicopter was?
So our expectation of
how things should show up
is not necessarily how
things will show up.
And the universe
seems to know best.
And if we can just
find this trust
and find this sort of
flow with the universe
and realize that
we energetically
are an integral part
of it, all of us
together form one collective
mind, and each of us
is an integral piece of it.
And it is our personal
responsibility
to really maintain
our energy so that it
is compatible with the rest
of that collective mind.
One thing that really
fascinated me when
I was doing all of the reading
about alternative spirituality
is that I also read a lot
about our alternative history,
and I was convinced
as a young child
that our ancient history
was not complete.
Everyone learns, at
least in America,
about those Giza pyramids
in our ancient history,
and they tell us that they were
built by pharaohs as burial
terms by thousands of slaves.
But then when they try to
recreate the engineering
feats of the Great Pyramid
today, they can't equal it.
They can't align it to the
four directions the way
it's aligned.
They can't stack the blocks
as closely as they're stacked.
And in fact, none
of us today really
can explain how those
pyramids were built.
And yet, we think we're so
advanced technologically.
So this immediately
told me many,
many years ago as a
young person that we
must have had some technology
that we've forgotten,
that somehow technology used
to exist on Earth that we
no longer know how to activate.
And so at first, I
thought this must
have been bigger machines
or somehow better tools
that we don't have anymore.
But one thing that I came across
that makes so much sense to me
is that these pyramids were
built using sound or vibration,
and that by somehow using
the human voice or some kind
of instrument, they
were able to alter I
guess the matter of stones
into something more malleable
that was either lighter
or easier to use or shape.
And somehow, this
alteration in frequency
was a skill that
was known to humans
who lived here on planet Earth.
And it fascinates
me that this is
found all over the planet,
these kinds of engineering feats
that we can't equal today.
And when you look at these,
you find that many of them
are aligned to stars or
different constellations
in our skies.
This also tells me that our
ancient ancestors knew things
that we don't give
them credit for.
And a lot of this
can also be related
to spirituality, because
way back in those times,
they knew many of the concepts
that we hear about today,
that we're just
starting to hear about,
that we're made of
one consciousness,
that mind existed before matter.
These kinds of things used
to be common knowledge.
And our more advanced
academic types
like to say that our
ancient ancestors maybe
weren't as smart
as we are today,
but I would like to
offer that maybe,
just maybe they were a
little smarter in some ways.
And these ancient sites around
the world are perfect evidence.
And so I love when people take
time to study and learn more
about these ancient structures,
because it informs us
on how we should
be moving forward
with our collective world today.
I encourage anyone who's
listening to find that hope,
because we've taken a
wrong turn in our society,
and we're in the process
of correcting that turn.
And that turn can really
be attributed to this idea
of materialist science.
The idea that only the
physical world exists
is actually a theory,
but somehow that theory
has come to be known as truth,
especially in our secular
society that has kind
of taken religion out
of the equation
for many reasons,
because there are some problems
with organized religion
that many people have found.
But in doing that, we've
kind of thrown the baby out
with the bathwater.
We've thrown out this
idea of spirituality.
And by bringing back
the idea that we
are more than our
physical bodies,
that we do not exist only from
birth to death and nothing
more, that there's a
grander reason for all
of us being here,
this kind of idea
can bring much
hope to many of us.
And we can access
this by going within.
We don't need to wait for
scientists to get around
to telling us that
mind is powerful,
that this is a good thing.
We can find out for ourselves.
By creating any practice of
going within-- and again,
sound can be very
useful for those of us
in the West who have
trouble quieting our minds,
especially in the secular
world where we're not
used to thinking
of a higher power
or some kind of
greater influence.
But when you go within
and quiet the mind
and get behind all
of those thoughts
and emotions and that despair
and those triggers that we all
have, you find there
is something greater,
and you are connected to it.
And I guarantee anyone
who takes the time
to really find the
techniques that
work for them will find this.
And this connection
to something greater
is such an antidote to
all of this in our world,
because the materialist
science that
has infiltrated
our secular world
has stripped all
meaning and purpose.
They've told us we're just
chemical zombies walking around
with this illusion
that we're conscious.
It sends me into an
existential crisis.
It's like, well, then why
do I even bother to think?
And so it's no wonder
that so many people,
if that's what they
believe is true,
are turning to this
kind of despair.
And so finding that
connection to something
greater, whatever
you want to call it--
the universe, the force,
whatever word you want to use.
If god is uncomfortable--
I know god was
uncomfortable for me,
and I prefer the word universe.
But that is a greater power.
Another thing that
you can imagine
is that you are a piece
of that greater power.
Think about the philosophy that
we're all part of one mind.
We can come to that
level of understanding
that we are creator
beings and that we
are responsible
ultimately for what's
going around in this world.
And so all of the despair we
see is really a reflection
that many of us have
despair in our inner worlds.
And if our inner
worlds start to get
more aligned with peaceful
kinds of feelings,
that's when the outer
world will catch up.
And so don't despair,
because each of us
has a role to play by really
finding that unique spark that
makes us who we are and
causing that to radiate
to the world around us.
No soul will be left behind,
and we are all in this together.
[MUSIC PLAYING]